----- Submitted by David in email (29 dec 2018)

1. "Earlier disease transmission experiments involving soil have not resulted in symptomatic sword ferns."

  Though this statement is obviously true, I would delete any reference to the soil experiments as
  it’s too easy for someone who casually follows the work to jump to conclusions. As is stated later
  in the proposal, there are possible reasons why soil transmission experiments have not yet
  produced no results,among them: the age of the ferns, the soil used, the lack of “in the ground”
  stresses, the possibility that the samples weren’t taken properly, storage of the samples before
  use. IMHO we have only scratched the surface in testing for soil borne transmission.  I think it
  is best to justify this experiment on its own, without reference to any other experiments. It’s
  simply a test for Xylem transmission, a repeat of what Paul did earlier, and that’s enough.  If
  you don’t want to delete the above statement, at least include the word “yet” at the end of the
  sentence.

2. We need a clear definition of a crinkly frond.

  About 2 months ago, Paul provided me with 2 “crinkly” fronds. These were blended in water and
  added to soil in which some small sword ferns were planted. So far, no sign of disease
  transmission. (I’ll go into detail on what I did when I report results in a couple more months,
  but obviously there were controls).  I was puzzled. I expected that if the disease could be
  transmitted thru the water in a bottle, it should be transmittable thru the roots. After all, the
  the mountain beavers aren’t going around putting fronds in beer bottles. Any transmission would
  have to be thru the roots, wouldn’t it?  I don’t know the answer to that, but I took a look at the
  photos of the fronds used in Paul’s experiment and compared them to the photos of the fronds in my
  experiment and guess what, they look completely different (at least to me).  Take a look at the
  photos in Pau’s report titled “bottleExperimentSummary-smallerImages.pdf.” In addition to the
  fronds being wavy or curled, the tips of the pinnae are curled back and/or shriveled and look
  desiccated. Actually I can’t be sure from the photos if those fronds are crispate or simple
  shriveled up.  On the other hand, the fronds that Paul provided for my experiment looked perfectly
  healthy, fully hydrated with clearly crispate distal pinnae edges.  I later checked with some fern
  experts and Richie Steffans (one of the best fern people in the PNW) sent me pictures of perfectly
  healthy Polystichum munitum with crispate pinnae and said there were several populations in WA
  where crispate pinnae are common.  So, I’m wondering. Were the fronds I used actually infected or
  not?  I assume that Paul took the fronds from an active die off area and probably from ferns that
  showed other signs of die off. And maybe the crispate edges at Seward are really only happening on
  infected ferns. I don’t know. My point is that we need a clear, repeatable definition of what a
  “crispy” frond is.

3. The fronds should be cut again right before placing them in the water. 15 seconds is a good time
   limit before the frond begins to seal itself.

4. Water source

  It would be good to used distilled water (so there’s no chloramine in the water) and buffer the
  pH. Multiple pH values could be used, e.g. ph=6, ph=7.5. Or the pH of the juices of a healthy
  sword fern could be measured and the pH of the water set to that value (near it, anyway).  At the
  very least I think it’s important to avoid municipal tap water which is buffered to be basic so it
  won’t dissolve the lead in old pipes.

4. Please remove my name from the participant list. I’m not doing this experiment.

---- Submitted by John O'Leary in email (30 dec 2018)

1. I definitely like David's comment "We need a clear definition of a crinkly frond." Definitely
   worth some effort getting that done.

2. In Marianne's proposal, having an intermediate step in between her first two rating steps might
    be worthwhile, perhaps enough to show they are very likely symptomatic without being 100% crispate,
    like this:

	0 = healthy
	1 = >25%
	2 = "crinkly" symptom, all pinnae curved with "crinkly" edges, possible early stage of infection...

3. Looking through this and your other material, it occurred to me that fronds physically touching
   one another may allow transmission. I'm not sure if her experiment would be the place to test this,
   as it would probably call for more samples. One thing I've noticed along animal trails is that the
   fronds hanging into the trail itself are often the first to show contamination, that is, animals
   would brush them while walking by, so some agent physically moving from frond to frond may be a
   common way for the disease to travel.

---- more from David (30 dec 2018)

  Good points, John, especially the point about touching. I’d have to go back thru the proposal to
  see if that is in there, but the experiment should make a clear choice between fronds touching
  (i.e. the part out of the water touches), not touching or doubling the sample size and having some
  touch and some not touch. It’s a variable that should be controlled.

  And while I’m at it, the fronds should all be cleaned before being used to make sure that no
  surface beasts or contaminants are unknowingly part of the experiment.

  My apologies to Marianne who is putting in a lot of effort. It’s so much easier to be strict when
  someone else is doing the experiment. I only wish I were as careful in my own experiments.
